+++
name = "intro to programming"
+++
Prerequisites: none.

**Things you'll learn**

 - fundamentals of programming with Python
 - how to create simple text-based programs (about 50 lines long)
   from scratch
 - how to think like a programmer

<!--more-->

**Topics covered**

 - console input/output
 - basic data types and manipulation (numbers, strings, booleans)
 - control structures (conditionals, loops, functions)
 - data structures and manipulation (lists, dictionaries)
 - file input/output
 - command line arguments
 - design and debugging techniques

This course uses procedural programming. Functional and object-oriented
programming are covered in later courses.

**Example programs**

{{< youtube -VjR3SZ8V4g >}}

Notice that this is a text-based program. Most of the programs you're
used to using have a graphical user interface with buttons and images
and things, but in this course we'll just use this simpler text
interface. The front-end web development course and the games course
will introduce graphical user interfaces.

**Resources**

I've started writing my own intro to programming course which begins
on the next page. You're welcome to give it a try, but it won't take
you very far. I haven't finished it yet. Fortunately, there are
many free websites that can help you learn Python.

[Code Academy](https://www.codecademy.com/learn/learn-python) and
[Code School](https://www.codeschool.com/learn/python) have
interactive lessons where you can type Python code into your web
browser and see the results without having to install anything. If you
like book learning, [Think
Python](http://greenteapress.com/wp/think-python-2e/) is available for
free in PDF and HTML form. You can also get the dead-tree edition from
Amazon. [Sphere online judge](http://www.spoj.com/) has a bunch of
programming challenges. You can submit solutions and then spoj will
tell you if you did it correctly.

I recommend that you start with code academy. (If you feel like it,
you could start with code school instead.) Books tend to have more
in-depth information, but they can be a drag if you try to read them
start to finish. You could switch back and forth between Think Python
and the interactive courses so that you learn more stuff but don't get
bored. Solve some problems on Spoj along the way. It'll be fun, and
it'll help you apply what you're learning.

After you've been learning for a bit, see if you can create the
high-low game shown in the video above. Think of that as a midterm
exam. It requires knowledge of some (but not all) of the things you
should learn in this course. Soon I'll add a more advanced program for
the "final exam."
