+++
name = "your first language"
+++
<!--
{{% note %}}
This course is still in early development. Many pieces are missing. If
you are evaluating this course for me, complete the core section. I
especially need to know about what problems you run into, along with
any other feedback you have. Send an email to foo@jacobobryant.com.
Thanks!
{{% /note %}}
-->

The first step is to just learn a programming language. This course
will teach you a language called Python. Python is relatively easy to
learn, but it's also a powerful language. For example, artificial
intelligence software is often written in Python. Whatever you end up
doing, Python is a good language to have in your repertoire.

Furthermore, the most important thing for you to learn is how to think
like a programmer, not any particular language. There are many
parallels between programming languages and natural languages. Natural
languages aren't just for communicating ideas we've already thought to
other people. We think in natural languages; they help us have ideas
in the first place. It is the same with programming languages. As you
learn the vocabulary and grammar of your first programming language,
you will learn how to take an idea for a program you want to write and
break it down into small, understandable steps.

After you've learned that process in one language like Python,
learning another language is much easier. You have to learn a new
vocabulary and grammar, but you don't have to relearn the hardest
part: how to think. Learning additional languages will improve your
ability to think, but you'll be building on top of what you have
already learned instead of starting from scratch.

But before we get started with Python, you need to install some software.
