+++
date = "2018-01-06"
title = "Suggestions for the BYU CS department (draft 1)"
draft = true
+++

A few weeks ago I graduated from BYU with a CS degree. During my senior exit
interview with the department, they asked what we would do to improve the
program. This essay explains my thoughts on that topic.

But first, it's important to understand what my plans were for after
graduation. I saw three main options: work for someone else (as a
software engineer), go to grad school or become a startup founder. My
main career goal has always been to become a startup founder. These
suggestions may or may not be as helpful for students with other goals.

**First pain**

It was difficult to find time to work on my own projects. Class
learning is alright, but personal projects have other benefits.

First, you choose what to build, so you can learn about things that
interest you. That helps build enduring motivation. Furthermore, you
aren't restricted to what the curriculum offers. For
example, the current curriculum emphasizes object-oriented
programming, but there's almost no mention of functional programming.
I learned functional programming by using Clojure in my personal
projects.

Second, because personal projects aren't so deadline-driven like
classes are, you can afford to spend time learning in an exploratory style
instead of just trying to complete the minimum requirements as quickly
as possible. After you get something working in a personal project,
you can then revise it so it's also elegant. But in a class, it
doesn't matter how gross the code is as long as it works. And even if
you had time to revise it, why would you? You likely won't touch it
after you turn it in, and you may not be interested in the project
anyway. It's important to learn the best way to do something (not just
the first way you think of), and classes aren't conducive to
practicing that.

Finally, personal projects can potentially have real users. You
can practice identifying users' needs, coming up with a possible
solution, getting feedback and revising the solution. You can
find out how hard it is to get users but how gratifying it is to build
something that improves their lives. This is a powerful experience
that you just won't find in typical classes.

Classes provide valuable experiences, but a combination of classes and
personal projects is better. Unfortunately, it's hard to do that when
you're taking 15 credits (on top of a part-time job).

**Second pain**

Having good cofounders is crucial to creating a startup. I think
helping students find potential cofounders is possibly the most
important thing any CS department can do for would-be startup
founders. However, I feel like I hardly know any of the other CS
majors. There are some extra-curriculur activities which have
potential to facilitate student interaction (e.g. clubs, hackathons,
coding competitions), but I rarely had time for any of those things. I
would guess that the same is true for many good potential cofounders.
Unfortunately, the CS curriculum on its own doesn't foster much
student interaction. 

**Solution hypothesis**

I have an idea that would cover both these problems. Allow students to
get more credit for working on personal projects, and facilitate
collaboration on these projects.

Students can already get some credit for personal projects by taking
CS 497R. I did that and it was a great experience. But there are a
couple limitations:

 1. You can only take 497R for two semesters.
 2. Projects must fit in the category of research.

It just so happened that my project (an improved algorithm for music
recommendation) worked well as a research project, but many projects
don't. The next phase in my music recommendation project involves
building a cross-platform mobile music app from scratch to house the
algorithm. This isn't research. Even if I could've used 497R to work
on that phase, I already spent my two semesters on the algorithm.

CS 498R (section 1, undergrad special projects) seems to allow
students to work on a non-research project, but I didn't take that
course so I don't know how close the experience is to 497R. Also, it
can only be taken for one semester.

My suggestion is to allow interested students to get up to, say,
18 credits for personal projects (i.e. 3 credits per semester for
three years). In addition, information about students' projects should
be easily accessible to other students. If students want to, they
could collaborate on a project. This would be a great way to have
meaningful interaction with other students.

**Implementation details**

The first big question is what to take out of the CS program to make
room for 12 more credits of personal projects. I think some good
candidates are CS 224, CS 252 and PHSCS 121. The remaining credits
could be covered by electives. This would be opt-in; students would
take the regular classes by default unless they requested to work on
personal projects instead.

Next, how do you make sure students don't use the extra flexibility to
slack off? To some extent, I don't think you can. Giving people more
freedom to make good choices necessarily allows them to make bad
choices. I think the right solution for this problem is to not worry
about it too much. CS 497R already has some structure in place to make
sure students aren't being set up for failure. More restrictions could
be added as long as they don't compromise the freedom and flexibility
that personal projects are supposed to provide.

Also, CS 497R requires a faculty mentor, and it would be difficult for
faculty to mentor so many projects. Changes would need to be made to
accomodate the load. Instead of providing mentorship, the faculty
could focus just on helping students to be accountable. For example,
students should be keeping a log of time spent, writing progress
reports, etc. TAs can assist here. As needed, the department
could facilitate peer mentorship using other students (this would be
another venue for meaningful student interaction).

All this would need to be reasonably publicized since it won't do
much good if none of the students know about it.

**Conclusion**

Despite the disclaimer about my startup goals, I think these changes
would help plenty of students who choose other career paths. In
addition to all the stated learning benefits, it would help students
become more independent and creative and less stimulus-driven. And
what CS major wouldn't benefit from a little more social interaction?
