+++
date = "2018-01-06"
title = "Suggestions for the BYU CS department"
+++

A few weeks ago I graduated from BYU with a CS degree. During my
senior exit interview with the department, they asked what we would do
to improve the program. This essay explains my thoughts on that topic.

*Summary: students don't have enough time to work on important
personal projects, and there isn't enough peer-to-peer interaction. We
can solve both these problems by allowing students to get more credit
for personal projects while facilitating collaboration on these
projects.*

**First pain**

It was difficult to find time to work on my own projects. Class
learning is alright, but personal projects have other benefits.

First, you choose what to build, so you can learn about things that
interest you. That helps build enduring motivation. Furthermore, you
aren't restricted to what the curriculum offers. For
example, the current curriculum emphasizes object-oriented
programming, but there's almost no mention of functional programming.
I learned functional programming by using Clojure in my personal
projects.

Second, because personal projects aren't so deadline-driven, you can
afford to spend time learning in an exploratory style instead of just
trying to complete the minimum requirements as quickly as possible.
After you get something working in a personal project, you can then
revise it so it's also elegant. But in a class, it doesn't matter how
gross the code is as long as it works. Even if you had time to revise
it, why would you? You likely won't touch it after you turn it in, and
you may not be interested in the project anyway. It's important to
learn the best way to do something (not just the first way you think
of), and classes aren't conducive to practicing that.

Third, personal projects can potentially have real users. You
can practice identifying users' needs, coming up with a possible
solution, getting feedback and revising the solution. You can
find out how hard it is to get users but how gratifying it is to build
something that improves their lives. This is a powerful experience
that you just won't find in typical classes.

Finally, having substantial personal projects is helpful in getting a
good job. They're a good indicator of if you can handle all the
aspects of solving a real-world problem.

Classes provide valuable experiences, but a combination of classes and
personal projects is better. Unfortunately, it's hard to do that when
you're taking 15 credits (on top of a part-time job).

**Second pain**

My main career goal is to be a startup founder, so I need to find
potential cofounders. However, I hardly know any of the other CS
majors. Many fellow students whom I've talked to agreed that the CS
student body isn't well connected.

There are some extra-curriculur activities which have potential to
facilitate student interaction (e.g. clubs, hackathons, coding
competitions), but I rarely had time for any of those things.
Unfortunately, the CS curriculum on its own doesn't foster much
interaction. 

Networking obviously has benefits for everyone, not just startup
founders. For example, it's hard to land a job at top companies like
Google unless a current employee can give you a good recommendation.
The lack of connection likely results in missed opportunities for lots
of students.

**Solution hypothesis**

We can solve both these problems by allowing students to get more
credit for personal projects while facilitating collaboration on these
projects.

Students can already get some credit for personal projects by taking
CS 497R. I did that and it was a great experience. But there are a
couple limitations:

 1. You can only take 497R for two semesters.
 2. Projects must fit in the category of research. [1]

It just so happened that my project (an improved algorithm for music
recommendation) worked well as a research project, but many projects
don't. The next phase in my music recommendation project involves
building a cross-platform mobile music app from scratch to house the
algorithm. This isn't research. Even if I could've used 497R to work
on that phase, I already spent my two semesters on the algorithm.

My suggestion is to allow interested students to get up to, say, 18
credits for personal projects (i.e. 3 credits per semester for three
years). In addition, information about students' projects should be
easily accessible to other students. If students want to, they could
collaborate on a project. This would be a great way to have meaningful
interaction with other students---there's no better way to get to know
another coder than by working with them on a project you both care
about.

**Implementation details**

The first big question is what to take out of the CS program to make
room for 12 more credits of personal projects. I think some good
candidates are CS 224, CS 252 and PHSCS 121. The remaining credits
could be covered by electives. This would be opt-in; students would
take the regular classes by default unless they requested to work on
personal projects instead. 

Next, how do you make sure students don't use the extra flexibility to
slack off? To some extent, I don't think you can. Giving people more
freedom to make good choices necessarily allows them to make bad
choices. I think the right solution for this problem is to not worry
about it too much. CS 497R already has some structure in place to make
sure students aren't being set up for failure. More restrictions could
be added as long as they don't compromise the freedom and flexibility
that personal projects are supposed to provide.

Also, CS 497R requires a faculty mentor, and it would be difficult for
faculty to mentor so many projects. Changes would need to be made to
accomodate the load. Instead of providing mentorship, the faculty
could focus just on helping students to be accountable. For example,
students should be keeping a log of time spent, writing progress
reports, etc. TAs can assist here. As needed, the department
could facilitate peer mentorship using other students (this would be
another venue for meaningful student interaction).

All this would need to be reasonably publicized since it won't do
much good if none of the students know about it.

**Conclusion**

I've received enthusiastic feedback about this essay from other BYU CS
grads who have experience in grad school, industry and startups. The
benefits of making these changes would be substantial. The changes
also wouldn't be hard to make. The department has already made great
progress by allowing 497R to be taken for two semesters. We can start
out just by gradually increasing the number of credits that can be
spent on personal projects. 

<br> <br> <br>
**Notes**

[1] CS 498R (section 1, undergrad special projects) seems to allow
students to work on a non-research project, but I didn't take that
course so I don't know how close the experience is to 497R. Also, it
can only be taken for one semester.
